Road infrastructure promotes inclusive growth, improves well-being, sustainable rural development and
enhance empowerment of women and girls. Poor and non-existent infrastructure are widespread in Nigeria,
which constrain market functionality and market access of rural farmers, mostly women, and worsen
poverty and nutrition levels. Several development projects have provided rural roads although, empirical
studies linking road infrastructure provision to household nutrition, women’s empowerment and gender
inequality are limited in the case of Nigeria. This study therefore attempts to measure the impact of rural
road infrastructure development on household nutrition, women’s empowerment and gender equality.
Secondary data set of 1,294 respondents obtained from the Value Chain Development Programme (VCDP),
spanning from 2019 to 2022 were used for the study, while qualitative information obtained from a rapid
survey collected from six VCDP states (Ogun, Niger, Benue, Anambra, Ebonyi and Taraba) between
December 2022 and February 2023 were used to validate the findings from the secondary data set.
Household nutrition was assessed using household dietary diversity score (HDDS) and minimum dietary
diversity score (MDDW) using standard procedures, Data were analysed using Gini coefficient and
Difference-in-Difference. Hence, the respondents were categorized into beneficiaries and non-
beneficiaries. The beneficiaries are households living in communities that have received the road
intervention of VCDP, while the non-beneficiaries are households living in communities that have not
received any road intervention. The VCDP road interventions commenced mainly in 2019 and were
completed before or by 2022.
The results of the study revealed that between 2019 and 2022, there were more rural households having
access to credit, with higher amount of credit obtained, farm, non-farm and total incomes among households
that benefitted from the VCDP road infrastructure than the non-beneficiaries. Moreover, the proportion of
disempowered women reduced more for VCDP beneficiaries than non-beneficiaries, while the
disempowerment gap among beneficiaries was less compared to non-beneficiaries. Furthermore, most
households had low dietary diversity (DD) in 2019, however in 2022 their dietary diversity was high. A
greater proportion of the beneficiary households had higher DD by 2022 relative to non-beneficiary
households. Particularly, women beneficiaries that consumed five or more food groups increased more by
2022, relative to non-beneficiary women. Finally, the VCDP road infrastructure provision had positive
impacts on household DD, MDDW and women’s empowerment at p<0.01, p<0.05 and p<0.01 levels of
significance, respectively, while it had mixed impacts on income inequality. Farm income of women was
reduced relative to men, whereas non-farm and total incomes were increased among women beneficiaries
than their non-beneficiary counterparts.
Therefore, it was concluded that road infrastructure improved women and household nutrition, women’s
empowerment, and total income inequality. Hence, government’s nutrition, empowerment and income
inequality policy should incorporate road infrastructure provision. To improve farm income inequality,
however, policy options should target birth control and other measures aimed at reducing household size.