Women play a significant role in household nutrition, so their empowerment is critical. Physical
infrastructure such as market and storage facilities may offer a potential solution to enhance women’s
empowerment, gender equality, and nutrition outcomes by increasing incomes, diversification, assets, and
employment opportunities for the household, but the effects may vary depending on the type and mix of
physical infrastructures. However, information on the impact of physical infrastructures on nutrition and
gender outcomes is scant in the literature despite its policy relevance. Moreover, existing studies on the
impact of physical infrastructure, focused mainly on measuring infrastructure as a single variable, and thus
fail to capture the heterogeneity of multiple physical infrastructures. Against this backdrop, this study
sought to examine the effects of using storage facility only, market facility only, and both infrastructures
on (1) women’s empowerment, (2) gender equality, (3) nutrition, and (4) hidden hunger in Ghana.
We revisited the Feed the Future data to generate two-round panel data using the first panel as the baseline
and a subsample of the second-round data as the second panel. A subsample of 1,492 households was
obtained for the analysis. The explanatory sequential mixed design was employed. This entailed collecting
quantitative data, followed by qualitative interviews (Focus Group Discussions and Key Informant
Interviews) to validate and interpret initial unexpected and surprising quantitative results. The quantitative
data was analyzed using the multinomial endogenous switching regression (MESR) and multinomial
endogenous treatment regression (METE) models, while the qualitative data was analyzed using content
analysis. We controlled for time-varying unobserved fixed and random effects in the MESR and METE
models using the Mundalk’s approach. Furthermore, we conducted mediation analysis to identify the
pathways between infrastructure use and the outcomes using Hayes macro-application “PROCESS” for
SPSS. We also conducted a falsification test to check the validity of the instruments used.
The results show that use of market only, storage facility only, and both infrastructures have significant
positive impact on hidden hunger (measured using available cereal per adult equivalent). The effect size is
relatively large for households that use storage facility only than users of market facility only and both
infrastructures. The results suggest that access to storage and market facilities may promote the production
and consumption of energy-dense food than micronutrient-rich foods. The mediation analysis revealed that
the pathway through which the use of both market and storage facilities may impact on hidden hunger is
through lower crop diversification. The results also reveal that the use of market and storage facilities plays
a significant role in nutrition outcomes. Specifically, the use of market facility only, storage facility only
and both infrastructures significantly increase minimum dietary diversity of women (MDD-W) and child’s
dietary diversity score (CDDS). The mediation analysis revealed that the pathways through which the use
of market and storage facilities may impact on women’s dietary diversity were through higher crop
diversification, increased income, and more accumulated assets. Likewise, the positive impact of market
and storage facilities on CDDS was mediated through higher crop diversification and more accumulated
assets. As expected, the use of both infrastructures has the largest impact on MDD-W and CDDS.
Moreover, for child malnutrition, the use of market only, storage facility only, and both infrastructures are
negatively associated with wasting and underweight in children under five. Except for the use of market
only, the use of storage facility only and both infrastructures have significant and negative impact on
stunting. The negative impact of use of both market and storage facilities on stunting was mediated through
higher crop diversification.
Further, the results show that households that used market facility only and both infrastructures attained
gender equality and had significantly more empowered women than those who did not. However, use of
storage facility only positively impacted on women’s empowerment but has no significant effect on gender
equality. One important finding is that the effect size is relatively large for households that use both
infrastructures as compared to those that use market facility only and storage facility only. This finding is
plausible because different physical infrastructures have distinct strengths that, when combined, result in
greater benefits for households The mediation analysis also shows that the mechanism and pathways
through which the use of both infrastructures may improve women’s empowerment are through the
ownership of asset, and lower crop diversification. We conclude that interventions that encourage the
development of both market and storage infrastructure have the potential to empower women and promote
gender equality more than a single infrastructure. Households, on the other hand, must be willing to use
both infrastructures to support policies that promote women's empowerment and gender equality. The key
implication of our findings is that using both market and storage facilities has substantial benefits on
households and should be extended. Interventions to foster the provision of both market and storage
facilities could improve nutrition and empower women, thus reducing malnutrition and gender inequality.