Recent developments in information infrastructure and communication technologies have generated
considerable interest over their use as a means of overcoming information constraints and improving
welfare outcomes. However, little is known about the impact of the various kinds of information
infrastructure on nutritious diets and women’s economic empowerment in sub-Saharan Africa. This
study examined the impacts of such projects on consumption of nutritious diets and women’s economic
empowerment in Ghana. It also assessed the effects of infrastructure support policies on access to
information infrastructure and on these outcomes. To investigate these, we used the Marginal Treatment
Effects (MTE) approach, which incorporates the observed and unobserved factors affecting placements
of infrastructure projects, nutritious diets, and women’s economic empowerment to estimate the
treatment effects, and the Policy Relevant Treatment Effects (PRTE). We used nationally representative
datasets from the sixth and seventh rounds of the Ghana Living Standards Survey, consisting of 16,772
and 14,009 households, respectively, to construct a pseudo-panel across communities. The GLSS
datasets are panel in most communities but not panel at the level of households because the data were
not collected from the same households but from the same communities in most of the communities
across these rounds. These datasets were complemented with data from focus group discussions and key
informant interviews. The findings of the study are:
• The study revealed that residing in a community with internet cafés, ICT centres and community
radios results in higher vitamin A-, protein-, and iron-rich food intake, respectively, but the
effect of internet cafés on nutritious diet intake appears to be lower in magnitudes compared to
the treatment effects of the other information infrastructure.
• The study also revealed that in the untreated state, farm households were observed to be
consuming significantly lower vitamin A-, protein-, and iron-rich foods compared to nonfarm
households. However, the presence of the information infrastructure allows farm households to
at least catch-up in nutritious diet intake with the nonfarm households.
• The slopes of the MTE curves show a positive selection on gains for internet cafés and a mixed
pattern of selection observed for ICT centres and community radios which also differs across
the nutritious diet indicators.
• Extension access on inputs access and use, and market prices of farm inputs and output are the
important immediate mechanisms through which the information infrastructure affects
nutritious diet intake, whereas farm output and farm revenue are the important intermediate
mechanisms.
• Regarding women’s economic empowerment, the results show that living in a community with
an information infrastructure significantly increases the average empowerment index, gender
parity index and thus, women’s economic empowerment, although the impacts of ICT centres
and community radios are also slightly higher in magnitudes than the impacts of internet cafés.
• Also, whereas women in farm households have a lower average empowerment index, gender
parity index, and women’s economic empowerment than women in nonfarm households
without any of the infrastructure, they tend to more than equalize, with the information
infrastructure, by having a higher average empowerment index, gender parity index, and
women’s economic empowerment than women of nonfarm households. And this is due to
worse economic empowerment conditions of women in farm households in the untreated state.
• The heterogeneities in the treatment effects reveal reverse selection, suggesting that women in
communities that are least likely to have the information infrastructure tend to benefit more
from having the infrastructure in terms of economic empowerment.
v
• The results further revealed that engagement in production, hours worked, and attendance of
town meetings are potential impact mechanisms through which the information infrastructure
affects women’s economic empowerment.
• Finally, the Policy Relevant Treatment Effects (PRTE) indicate that expansion of electricity
coverage increases the likelihood of the communities having internet café, ICT centre and
community radio, and the magnitudes in increased likelihood of getting the information
infrastructure are even higher for farm communities.
• But more importantly, an expansion in electricity increases the impact of the information
infrastructure on nutritious diet intake and women’s economic empowerment per household and
women shifted, respectively, which is suggestive of the importance of an enabling environment
on increasing farm households and women’s access to information infrastructure, and on
improving their nutritious diet intake and women’s empowerment.